Wiki reorg: Governance Learn Pages (#4775)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-opengov.md

  manage parameters, admin, and spending proposals.
- The Public: All token holders not part of the Council or the Technical Committee.

Over the first few years of operation, Governance V1 ensured the appropriate usage of treasury funds
and enabled timely upgrades and fixes. Like most early technologies, protocols must evolve as they
mature to improve their shortcomings and keep up with modern advancements. In Governance V1, all
referenda carried the same weight as only one referendum could be voted on at a time (except for
emergency proposals), and the voting period could last multiple weeks. Also, an
[alternating voting timetable](./learn-governance.md#alternating-voting-timetable) allowed to vote
either for a public referendum or a council motion every
{{ polkadot: 28 days :polkadot }}{{ kusama: 7 days :kusama }}. This resulted in the system favoring
careful consideration of very few proposals instead of broad consideration of many.

OpenGov changes how the practical means of day-to-day decisions are made, making the repercussions
of referenda better scoped and agile to increase the number of collective decisions the system can

> make.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make at any given time.
```

The following content is focused on what the new OpenGov version brings to the governance on
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}, and on the main differences with
previous governance versions. We recommend learning about [Governance v1](./learn-governance.md) to
better understand the need for and the direction of OpenGov.

## Summary

In Governance v1, active token holders (public) and the council together administrated network's
upgrade decisions. Whether the public or the council initiated the proposal, it would eventually
have to go through a referendum to let all holders (weighted by stake and conviction) make the
decision.

The Council fulfilled its role as the representative of the public, guardian of the treasury and
initiator of legislation, but it was often seen as a centralized entity. To further decentralize
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}, OpenGov proposes the following main
changes:

> - Migrating all responsibilities of the Council to the public via democracy votes

Reviewer: Isn't OpenGov a direct or "pure" form of democracy? 

Ignore if incorrect, suggestion:
```suggestion
- Migrating all responsibilities of the Council to the public via a direct democracy voting system.
```

| Voters can decide to delegate votes to another account.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Voters can use [multirole delegations](#multirole-delegation) and delegate votes to different accounts depending on origins.                                                                                                                                              | More agile delegations tailored by expertise.                                                                                                               |

## Proposals

:::info Starting a proposal in Governance v1

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#proposals) for more information about starting referenda in
Governance v1.

:::

In OpenGov, anyone can start a referendum at any time and do so as often as they wish. New features,
known as [**Origins and Tracks**](#origins-and-tracks), are introduced to help aid in the flow and

> processing of the referenda protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OpenGov, anyone can start a referendum at any time and do so as often as they wish.  Previous features were expanded and improved, most notably [**Origins and Tracks**](#origins-and-tracks) help aid in the flow and processing of the referenda protocol.
```

### Cancelling and Blacklisting

:::info Cancelling Referenda in Governance v1

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#cancelling-proposals) for more information about cancelling
referenda in Governance v1.

:::

In OpenGov, there is a special operation called **Cancelation** for intervening with a proposal
already being voted on. The operation will immediately reject an ongoing referendum regardless of
its status. There is also a provision to ensure the deposit of the proposer is slashed if the
proposal is malicious or spam.

Cancelation itself is a governance operation that the network must vote upon to be executed.
Cancelation comes with
[its own Origin and Track](../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#referendum-canceller) which has a
low lead-time and Approval/Support curves with slightly sharper reductions in their thresholds for
passing, given that it is invoked with a sense of urgency.

:::info Blacklisting

Blacklisting referenda in OpenGov is
[the same as in Governance v1](./learn-governance.md#blacklisting-proposals).

:::

## Referenda

:::info Public and Council Referenda in Governance v1

> With the Council's dissolution, [council referenda](./learn-governance.md#council-referenda) are no
> more present in OpenGov.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the Council's dissolution, [council referenda](./learn-governance.md#council-referenda) are no
longer present in OpenGov.
```

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#public-referenda) for more information about public referenda
in Governance v1.

**In OpenGov all referenda are public.** The [Fellowship](#fellowship) has the option to
[whitelist](#whitelisting) referenda that can be then proposed in the track with
[whitelist origin](../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#whitelisted-caller).

:::

### Referenda Timeline

:::info Voting timetable in Governance v1

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#referenda-timeline) for more information about the voting
timetable in Governance v1.

:::

![opengov-timeline](../assets/opengov-timeline.png)

The figure above provides a summary view of the referenda timeline for OpenGov.

In (1), when a referendum is initially created, the community can immediately vote on it. However,
it is not immediately in a state where it can end or otherwise have its votes counted, be approved,

> and summarily enacted. Instead, the proposal will stay within a **Lead-in Period** until it fulfills

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ultimately enacted. Instead, the proposal will stay within a **Lead-in Period** until it fulfills
```

- **Preparation Period**: the minimum amount of voting time needed before entering the Decision
  Period (given capacity and deposit are met).
- **Decision Period**: the maximum time to approve a proposal. The proposal will be accepted if
  approved by the end of the period.
- **Confirmation Period**: the minimum amount of time (within the Decision Period) the approval and
  support criteria must hold before the proposal is approved and moved to the enactment period.
- **Minimum Enactment Period**: the minimum amount of waiting time before the proposed changes are
  applied
- **Approval Curve**: the curve describing the minimum % of _aye_ votes as a function of time within
  the Decision Period. The approval % is the portion of _aye_ votes (adjusted for conviction) over
  the total votes (_aye_, _nay_, and _abstained_).
- **Support Curve**: the curve describing the minimum % of all votes as a function of time within
  the Decision Period. The support % is defined as the portion of all votes without conviction (i.e.
  _aye_, _nay_ and _abstained_) over the total possible amount of votes in the system. Support is a
  measure of turnout.

> So, for example, a runtime upgrade (requiring a `set_code` call, if approved) does not have the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a runtime upgrade (requiring a `set_code` call, if approved) does not have the same
```

> implications for the ecosystem as the approval of a treasury tip (`reportAwesome` call), and

Reviewer: Maybe specify that both use different Origins respectively, unless it is clear enough then disregard.

| Includes the [Council](./learn-governance.md#council), the [Technical Committee](./learn-governance.md#technical-committee), and the Public (i.e. token holders).                                                                                                                                                                              | Includes the Public and the [Fellowship](#fellowship).                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Simpler and more decentralized structure.                                                                                                                   |

> | Referenda executed only from one origin (Root). Referenda in this origin must be carefully scrutinized. Therefore, there is only one track (i.e. only one referendum at a time can be executed).                                                                                                                                               | Referenda executed from [multiple origins](../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#origins-and-tracks-info), each with a different track that shapes proposals’ timelines. Depending on the origin, multiple copies of the same track are possible (i.e. multiple tracks). | Possibility to categorize proposals (based on importance and urgency) and execute them simultaneously within and between origins.                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Referenda executed only from one origin (Root). Referenda in this origin must be carefully scrutinized. Therefore, there is only one track (i.e. only one referendum at a time can be executed).                                                                                                                                               | Referenda executed from [multiple origins](../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#origins-and-tracks-info), each with a different track that shapes proposals’ timelines. Depending on the origin, multiple referenda within the same track are possible. | Possibility to categorize proposals (based on importance and urgency) and execute them simultaneously within and between origin tracks.                           |
```

| Proposals can be submitted by either the Council or the Public.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | The public submits proposals.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | More democratic.                                                                                                                                            |

> | Uses [Adaptive Quorum Biasing](./learn-governance.md#adaptive-quorum-biasing) to define the approval threshold based on turnout. Given the same turnout, council motions require fewer approvals to pass.                                                                                                                                      | Uses origin-specific approval and support curves defining the amount of approval and support (i.e. turnout) needed as a function of time. The same curves are applied to all tracks within the same origin.                                                               | Referenda timeline depends on the origin and not on who submitted the proposal (i.e. Council or Public). This is a more democratic and equalitarian system. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Uses [Adaptive Quorum Biasing](./learn-governance.md#adaptive-quorum-biasing) to define the approval threshold based on turnout. Given the same turnout, council-initiated referenda require fewer Aye votes to pass compared to public referenda.                                                                                                                                      | Uses origin-specific approval and support curves defining the amount of approval and support (i.e. turnout) needed as a function of time. The same curves are applied to all referenda within the same origin track.                                                               | Referenda timeline depends on the origin and not on who submitted the proposal (i.e. Council or Public). This is a more democratic and equalitarian system. |
```

| Uses [alternating voting timetable](./learn-governance.md#alternating-voting-timetable) allowing voters to cast votes for either council or public referenda every 28 eras.                                                                                                                                                                    | Multiple referenda can be voted at the same time.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | More flexible and agile governance system.                                                                                                                  |

> | Except for emergency proposals, all referenda have fixed voting and enactment periods of 28 eras.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Periods' length is customizable and has pre-defined limits for each origin. The same limits apply to all tracks with the same origin. For example, the track in the origin Root will be longer than the tracks within the Small Tipper origin.                            | Referenda’s timeline is tailored to their importance and urgency. Flexible enactment period based on origin.                                                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Except for emergency proposals, all referenda have fixed voting and enactment periods of 28 eras.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Periods' length is customizable and has pre-defined limits for each origin. The same limits apply to all tracks with the same origin. For example, the track in the origin Root will be longer than the track within the Small Tipper origin.                            | Referenda’s timeline is tailored to their importance and urgency. Flexible enactment period based on origin.                                                |
```

> | Emergency proposals can be simultaneously executed with other proposals and have shorter enactment period, but need to be proposed by the Technical Committee and approved by the Council.                                                                                                                                                     | No emergency proposals. The Fellowship can whitelist proposals that will have their origin with shorter lead-in, confirmation, and enactment periods.                                                                                                                     | Reduced complexity for urgencies.                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Emergency proposals turned referenda can be simultaneously voted on and executed with other referenda and have shorter enactment periods. They must be proposed by the Technical Committee and approved by the Council.                                                                                                                                                     | No emergency proposals. The Fellowship can whitelist proposals that will have their origin with shorter lead-in, confirmation, and enactment periods.                                                                                                                     | Fellowship is a more decentralized entity when compared to the Technical Committee. Whitelisting a proposal requires a majority of approval from the fellowship.                                                                                                                           |
```

| Voters can decide to delegate votes to another account.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Voters can use [multirole delegations](#multirole-delegation) and delegate votes to different accounts depending on origins.                                                                                                                                              | More agile delegations tailored by expertise.                                                                                                               |

## Proposals

:::info Starting a proposal in Governance v1

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#proposals) for more information about starting referenda in
Governance v1.

:::

In OpenGov, anyone can start a referendum at any time and do so as often as they wish. Previous
features were expanded and improved, most notably [**Origins and Tracks**](#origins-and-tracks) help

> aid in the flow and processing of the referenda protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
aid in the flow and processing of the submitted referenda.
```

### Cancelling and Blacklisting

:::info Cancelling Referenda in Governance v1

See [this page](./learn-governance.md#cancelling-proposals) for more information about cancelling
referenda in Governance v1.

:::

> In OpenGov, there is a special operation called **Cancelation** for intervening with a proposal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In OpenGov, there is a special operation called **Cancellation** for intervening with a proposal
```

already being voted on. The operation will immediately reject an ongoing referendum regardless of
its status. There is also a provision to ensure the deposit of the proposer is slashed if the
proposal is malicious or spam.

> Cancelation itself is a governance operation that the network must vote upon to be executed.
> Cancelation comes with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cancellation is a governance operation the network must vote on to be executed.
Cancellation comes with
```

- There must be enough room for the decision within the origin. Different origins have their limit
  on the number of proposals that can be decided simultaneously. Tracks that have more potent
  abilities will have lower limits. For example, the Root level Origin has a limit of one, implying
  that only a single proposal may be decided on at once.
- A decision deposit must be submitted. Creating a referendum is cheap as the deposit value consists
  of only the value required for the on-chain storage needed to track it. But, having a referendum
  reviewed and decided upon carries the risk of using up the limited spots available in the
  referenda queue. Having a more significant but refundable deposit requirement makes sense to help
  mitigate spam.

Until they are in the lead-in period, proposals remain undecided. Once the criteria above are met,
the referendum moves to the _deciding_ state. The votes of the referendum are now counted towards
the outcome.

In (2), the proposal enters the **Deciding Period** where votes can be cast. For a proposal to be
approved, votes must satisfy the approval and support criteria for at least the **Confirmation

> Period**; otherwise, the proposal is automatically rejected. A rejected proposal can be submitted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Period**; otherwise, the proposal is automatically rejected. A rejected proposal can be resubmitted
```

> anytime and as many times as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
anytime and as many times as needed.
```

In (3), approved proposals will enter the **Enactment Period**, after which proposed changes will be
executed.

Note how the length of the lead-in, deciding, confirmation, and enactment periods vary depending on

> the origin. Root origin has more extended periods than the other origins, such as the Small Tipper
> ones. Also, the number of tracks within each origin differs, with Root origin only accepting one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the origin. Root origin has more extended periods than the other origins. Also, the number of referenda within each track differs, with the Root origin track only accepting one.
```

proposal at a time (see below).

![opengov-track-capacity](../assets/opengov-track-capacity.png)

This directly affects the number of proposals that can be voted on and executed simultaneously.
Continuing the comparison between Root and Small Tipper, Small Tipper will allow many proposals on

> different tracks to be executed simultaneously. In contrast, Root will allow only one proposal in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
its track to be executed simultaneously. In contrast, Root will allow only one proposal in
```

> one track. Once the track capacity is filled, additional proposals in the lead-in period will queue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
its track. Once the track capacity is filled, additional proposals in the lead-in period will queue
```

until place is available to enter the deciding period.

### Origins and Tracks

An **Origin** is a specific level of privilege that will determine the **Track** of all referenda

> originating from that origin. The track outlines the lifecycle of the proposal and is independent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executed with that origin. The track is basically a pipeline in which the proposal lives and proceeds and is independent 
```

  measure of turnout.

For example, a runtime upgrade (requiring a `set_code` call, if approved) does not have the same
implications for the ecosystem as the approval of a treasury tip (`reportAwesome` call), and
therefore different Origins for these two actions are needed in which different deposits, turnouts
(i.e. support), approvals, and a minimum [enactment](#enactment) periods will be predetermined on
the pallet.

For detailed information about origin and tracks, and parameter values in Kusama, see
[this page](../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#origins-and-tracks-info).

### Approval and Support

:::info Adaptive Quorum Biasing is deprecated

In OpenGov, [Adaptive quorum biasing](./learn-governance.md#adaptive-quorum-biasing) used in
Governance V1 has been replaced with the **Approval and Support system**.

:::

![opengov-approval-support](../assets/opengov-approval-support.png)

The figure above provides a summary view of how the approval and support system works during the
Decision Period.

Once the proposal exits the Lead-in Period and enters the Voting Period, to be approved, it must

> satisfy the approval and support criteria for the minimum **Confirmation Period**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
satisfy the approval and support criteria for the **Confirmation Period**.
```

- **Approval** is defined as the share of approval (_aye_ votes) vote-weight (after adjustment for
  [conviction](#voluntary-locking)) against the total vote-weight (for all approval, rejection, and
  abstained).
- **Support** is the total number of votes (ignoring any adjustment for conviction) compared to the
  total possible votes that could be made in the system.

The figure shows that even if the approval criteria are satisfied (i.e. % approval is greater than
the approval curve), the proposal only enters the confirmation period once the support criteria are
satisfied (i.e. % support is greater than the support curve). If the referendum meets the criteria

> for at least the minimum confirmation period, then the proposal is approved and scheduled for

Reviewer 2: There is no minimum here. It is just the confirmation period of the track, which is a predefined value.

```suggestion
for the confirmation period, then the proposal is approved and scheduled for
```

> enactment. The Enactment Period is specified when the referendum is proposed but is also subject to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enactment. The Enactment Period can be specified when the referendum is proposed but is also subject to
```

a minimum value based on the Track. More powerful Tracks enforce a larger Enactment Period to ensure
the network has ample time to prepare for any changes the proposal may bring.

Different Origins' tracks have different Confirmation Periods and requirements for approval and
support. For additional details on the various origins and tracks, check out
[this table](./../maintain/maintain-guides-opengov.md#origins-and-tracks). Configuring the amount of
support and overall approval required for it to pass is now possible. With proposals that use less
privileged origins, it is far more reasonable to drop the required support (i.e. turnout) to a more
realistic amount earlier than those which use highly privileged classes such as `Root`. Classes with

> more political significance can be made to require higher approval early on, to avoid controversy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more significance can be made to require higher approval early on, to avoid controversy.
```

- The Fellowship should be designed to grow and develop its membership, aggregate levels of
  expertise and ensure that its overall decision-making capacity strengthens over time.

To support these conditions, the Fellowship will have a constitution that outlines the requirements
and expectations for individuals to attain and retain any given rank. Higher ranks can vote and
promote lower ranks based on this constitution.

**Demotion** occurs automatically after a given period has elapsed, and the member is unable to
defend their position to their peers.

**Suspension** can happen only through a referendum, which ensures that the Fellowship's bias alone
does not necessarily result in expulsion.

To prevent the Fellowship from becoming a cabal (popularity with Fellowship peers alone should not
be enough to gain access to a top rank), gaining access to the top tiers of the ranks will require a
referendum.

### Whitelisting

In OpenGov, it allows the Fellowship to authorize a new origin (known as Whitelisted-Root) to be
executed with Root-level privileges and will only work with specified commands that have been
approved by the Fellowship.

> The Whitelist pallet allows one Origin to escalate the privilege level of another Origin for a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Whitelist](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_whitelist/) pallet allows one Origin to escalate the privilege level of another Origin for a
```
